=== p1 ===
Bijlage HAVO
2025
tijdvak 1
Engels
Tekstboekje
HA-1002-a-25-1-b

=== p2 ===
Ga verder op de volgende pagina.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 2 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p3 ===
Tekst 1
London’s first plastic-free takeaway business
1 Like so many of us, Anshu Ahuja used to get
home from work on a Friday night, collapse in front
of the television and order a takeaway. Every time,
though, it would come with a hefty helping of guilt.
‘It would arrive on a noisy scooter in a puff of
smoke, packaged in a pile of plastic,’ she says.
‘The damage to the planet was so obvious.’
2 During her childhood in Mumbai, the dabbawalas system delivered food
by bicycle in reusable tiffin tins known as dabbas. ‘I thought, there must
be a way of taking this centuries-old system and using technology to
modernise it for London,’ she says. The result is DabbaDrop, London’s
first plastic-free and emissions-free takeaway service, which delivers
South Asian food including dals and vibrant curries to Londoners in dabba
tins, with sides such as ginger jam and roti packaged in compostable pots
and paper bags.
3 DabbaDrop works on a subscription basis, allowing customers the option
to book one regularly changing menu each week. ‘All our meals are
cooked according to how many people we’ll be feeding that week, which
means nothing goes to waste,’ says Anshu. ‘We also try to use as much of
the ingredients as possible, so if we’re doing a pumpkin curry we’ll include
the skin, for example. Any waste we do have we compost.’
4 The company uses its own fleet of cyclists, as well as low-impact delivery
companies such as Ecofleet and Pedal Me. The DabbaDrop team has
calculated that on average each of their mains (a curry, salad and dal)
has a 75 per cent lower carbon footprint than a standard Indian
takeaway. 3 The business has expanded rapidly from its east London
origins, spreading to parts of north London and recently starting to deliver
in south-east London, too. ‘There’s definitely a growing audience of
people who want a delicious takeaway without feeling guilty,’ says Anshu.
adapted from standard.co.uk, 2021
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 3 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p4 ===
Tekst 2
Tunnel vision: ‘Mole Man’ home bags elite award
A house that once had local planners tearing out their hair because of the
owner’s penchant for digging illegal underground tunnels has won
Best Dwelling at this year’s New London Architecture Awards.
The late William Lyttle, nicknamed the Hackney Mole Man, spent
40 years hollowing out a network of tunnels that reached a depth of
26 feet and stretched out 65 feet in all directions.
Lyttle was evicted in 2006, and the property has now been turned into
a three-storey home and art studio. Judges praised architects Adjaye
Associates for paying homage to the home’s history with underground
living areas.
Hackney Citizen, 2021
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 4 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p5 ===
Tekst 3
Charitable billionaires
Pascale Hughes’s report on altruism (i weekend, 1 June) was
excellent and balanced. It exposes the hypocrisy of the ‘1 per cent’.
I remember writing a letter to another national newspaper in 2010 in
response to the Giving Pledge1) announced by Bill Gates and Warren
Buffet and a number of multibillionaires, asking them two simple
questions: what is the hourly rate of workers in your company; and how
much tax do you pay in the country where you make your profit?
I am pleased to see that the article states the shameful fact that
inequality widens in tandem with corporate profits. Simple changes to our
tax system, such as financial transaction tax and enforcing regulations for
tax collection more rigorously, would have an immediate impact.
Christina Kadir
Brighton,
East Sussex
i newspaper, 2019
noot 1 the Giving Pledge = een campagne om extreem rijke mensen aan te moedigen om een
groot deel van hun rijkdom aan goede doelen te geven
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 5 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p6 ===
Tekst 4
The rise of y’all
by Thomas Moore Devlin
1 Have y’all heard? “Y’all” is in the
mainstream now. While historically
associated with the southern United
States, “y’all” is becoming a popular
choice for people who want to
address multiple people. The rise of
“y’all” fills a lexical hole in English
that’s been around for a long time:
the lack of a second-person plural
pronoun.
2 Whether you’ve embraced “y’all” or prefer a different way of referring to a
group of people, it’s worth knowing about the history of the second-person
plural in English. It combines Old English, regional dialects, African
American Vernacular English (AAVE1)) and gendered language all into a
single story. So yes, “y’all” really has it all.
3 Pronouns are a closed class of words. That means it is very, very rare for
new pronouns to arise (compare that to open class words like verbs and
nouns – new ones are added to our lexicon all the time). Creating a new
second-person plural pronoun that everyone would use, then, is difficult.
What’s happened instead is that many different pronouns have appeared
in various parts of the world.
4 The two most popular second-person plural pronouns (at least in the
United States) are “y’all” and “you guys”. As of right now, “you guys” is a
far more popular choice than “y’all,” but it’s facing a reckoning at the
moment. There’s disagreement as to whether “you guys” is a gendered
term or not. On the one hand, at this point people refer to other people as
“guys” no matter the gender. On the other, “guys” explicitly originated as a
term referring to men, and so it joins a pattern of terms originally meaning
“men” that are now used to refer to all people.
5 The argument against “you guys” is still mainly made by the minority, and
as far as language usage goes it can seem like a minor point. But as
people make the argument for a more inclusive term, they turn to one
other option: “y’all”.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 6 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p7 ===
6 There are quite a few reasons for the rise of “y’all” over the past decade.
As we mentioned earlier, it’s a gender-neutral option, and thus some
linguists are advocating for its adoption by more people. Plus, the
mainstream use of AAVE has become more and more common. Though
“y’all” is not as obviously tied to AAVE as words like “woke” and “bae,” it’s
certainly part of a lexicon used by African Americans that is being
absorbed by a larger body of people. Social media is also a major
contributor here, breaking down geographic boundaries. 11 , this has
allowed the word to flourish.
7 “Y’all” has a long way to go before becoming part of Standard English, or
even Standard American English, but it’s not entirely far-fetched that it
might. It’s an incredibly versatile term – it can also be used to address a
single person, or you can use “all y’all” to widen the scope of who you’re
talking to – and it’s more concise than most of the other second-person
plural pronouns mentioned before.
8 If you’ve never used “y’all” before, give it a try. It might sound like you’re
doing an imitation of a southerner at first, but after a while it becomes
natural. We won’t tell you what to do with your life, but if y’all want to
adopt a new way of addressing groups, don’t overlook “y’all.”
babbel.com, 2019
noot 1 AAVE = variëteit van het Engels die gesproken wordt door veel Afro-Amerikanen in
met name stedelijke gemeenschappen in de Verenigde Staten en Canada
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 7 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p8 ===
Tekst 5
Het volgende fragment komt uit een roman geschreven door
Marian Keyes. In dit fragment gaan Grace en haar vriend, Damien
Stapleton, op kraambezoek bij zijn zus Christine.
This Charming Man
Christine, tall and elegant and astonishingly svelte for a woman who had
given birth only five weeks ago, came to welcome us. ‘Come in, come in.
Sorry, I’m just in myself, it’s all a bit …’ […] ‘Richard should be home
soon.’ Richard was Christine’s husband. He had one of those mysterious
jobs where he spent fourteen hours a day on the phone, making money.
Damien and I joked privately that every day he was locked into his office
and wasn’t allowed to leave until he’d made another hundred million euro.
(‘Ninety-eight … ninety-nine … still ninety-nine … ninety-nine – and a
hundred! Well done, off you go home, Richard.’)
We followed Christine into the enormous Colefax and Fowler kitchen,
where a nervous-looking Polish girl was doing something at the
microwave.
‘This is Marta,’ Christine said. ‘Our new nanny.’
Marta nodded hello and promptly scarpered.
‘And this …’ Christine gazed fondly into a bassinet, in which a tiny
pink-skinned baby was asleep. ‘… is Maximillian.’
(Yes, Christine and Richard had named their four children after
emperors. I know it makes them sound like grandiose nutters, but they’re
not.)
Damien and I stared politely at the sleeping child.
‘Okay, you can stop admiring him now.’ Christine reached for a
corkscrew. ‘Wine?’
‘Yes. Can I do anything to help?’
It was a fake question. No one could ever help Christine. She did
everything so much better and faster than everyone else that there was
no point. Anyway, I didn’t want to help. I was at someone’s else’s house
for my dinner, why would I want to do stuff I’d have to do at home?
‘All done,’ Christine said. ‘Did most of it last night. Just a few last-
minute fiddly bits.’
‘What’s with your trouser suit?’ I asked her. ‘How come you’re looking
so clean? You’re not back at work already?’
‘Certainly not, I’m just popping in for a couple hours a day, to keep an
eye on things.’
Christine was so clever and accomplished that she no longer did much
actual scrubbed-up, green-gowned, hands-on surgery stuff. Instead she
was Head of Surgery at Dublin’s most expensive hospital, the first
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 8 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p9 ===
woman to have ever held that post. (Or perhaps she was the youngest
ever Head. It was hard to keep track because the Stapletons seemed to
be always winning accolades. If, every time one of them got a promotion
or won an award, we gave them the celebration they deserved, we’d all
end up in the Priory.)
‘So where’s Augustina?’ I looked around.
‘At her Sanskrit lesson?’ Damien asked.
‘Haha. Mandarin, actually.’
It took me a moment to realize that Christine was serious.
‘We don’t make her go,’ Christine said, as I tried to hide my
astonishment – well, actually distress, if I’m to be honest. ‘She asked to
go to lessons.’
Too weird. What nine-year-old would ask to learn Mandarin?
‘And we keep an eye on her,’ Christine said.
‘On her work-life balance?’ Damien suggested.
‘If your tongue could get any further into your cheek…’ Christine said.
‘Anyway, cheers.’ She held up her glass. ‘It’s lovely to see you both.’
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 9 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p10 ===
Tekst 6
The Matrix: is this really happening?
by Brian Raftery
1 It was early 1999, and people were
freaking out about the future. A new
millennium was on the way, carrying
with it the promise – or threat – of
massive change. Would the next
century guide us toward a tech-
enabled utopia? Or, as some feared,
would it plunge the world into a full-
on apocalypse? These were strange
days, marked by equal parts anxiety and anticipation. Which made it the
perfect moment for a sleek, cerebral movie called The Matrix.
2 Created by a pair of mostly unknown filmmakers (Lana and Lilly
Wachowski), and headlined by a commercially iffy star (Keanu Reeves),
the $60m cyber-thriller became an instant hit. Some viewers were sucked
in by the film’s mind-melting storyline – about a hacker named Neo who
discovers that mankind is enslaved in a computer-made simulation.
Others were simply turned on by the film’s whoa-inducing fight scenes. By
the end of 1999, it was clear that The Matrix was The One: the first true
digital-era blockbuster, one that foretold the ways technology would
reshape not only filmmaking, but also our daily lives, both for better and
for worse.
3 The pop-cultural impact of the film was clear within months of its release.
The Wachowskis had incorporated new digital effects that let characters
freeze in mid-air, or dodge hails of gunfire, while cameras circled the
action in a near-360-degree swirl. As a result, The Matrix didn’t quite look
like any movie that had come before, and its slowed-down, hyper-detailed
visual style was soon being satirised and adapted by other filmmakers.
Not since 1977, when Star Wars was released, had a movie so quickly
rebooted the look and feel of mainstream moviemaking.
4 But these were all surface-level aftershocks. The deeper legacy of The
Matrix wouldn’t be revealed for years. A DVD release broke sales records
at the time, allowing for multiple repeat viewings. But it was the internet
that really let Matrix fans go down the rabbit hole. The Wachowskis’ script
had been kicking around since the mid-90s, a time when the mainstream
web was in its infancy. But by 1999, millions of Americans were chatting,
ranting, and shopping online. At the same time, the spectre of a possibly
destructive “millennium bug” hung over everything.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 10 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p11 ===
5 It was a tense, transformative period – one that was encapsulated by The
Matrix. If you were suspicious of all this new technology, the film served
as a cautionary tale about our devices overpowering our lives. But if you
were already very online, The Matrix was proof that the internet was full of
possibility – and that if things went bad, people had the power to rise up
and reclaim their own humanity.
6 These were big ideas and they led to big conversations, many of which
percolated online, where debates and deep-dives carried on day and
night, and around the globe. Some of the questions moviegoers were
asking at the time: “Are we being controlled by our computers?” “If The
Matrix is real, what can you do about it?” Also, “where can I get some of
those cool Matrix sunglasses?” The Wachowskis had made a film that
seemed to speak directly to the internet, and the internet couldn’t stop
speaking back.
7 Neo and his partner, Trinity (played by Carrie-Anne Moss), treat each
other with a level of mutual respect that’s rarely seen in male-female
big-screen relationships, even to this day. And they work alongside a
multi-gender, multi-racial team of rebels. 21 its grim shoot-’em-up
scenes and killer machines, The Matrix is a deeply hopeful film: one that
pushes the value of caring for one another, and the freedom that comes
from defining who you really are.
8 Still, the ultimate sign of The Matrix’s ongoing importance, as well as its
predictive powers, is the fact that, more than two decades after its
release, it’s becoming harder to tell if we’re living with The Matrix, or
within it. The internet has become so overloaded with 22 , it’s now
possible for everyone to generate their own immersive reality (or realities).
You can now opt in to whatever set of facts you like, knowing your beliefs
– no matter how damaged, or even dangerous – will be supported by a
vast digital machine, one more terrifying than anything the Wachowskis
could have imagined.
9 It’s a grim situation, one that undercuts the message of hope that was
hardwired into The Matrix. Perhaps we’ll get a brighter glimpse of our next
future this month, when The Matrix Resurrections arrives in cinemas. But
no matter where Neo and Trinity go next, the message of the original
landmark film will continue to ring truer than ever: we’re all increasingly
stuck in our own versions of The Matrix – but we still have the power to
rage against the machines and free ourselves.
theguardian.com, 2021
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 11 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p12 ===
Tekst 7
Hydroelectric dams and big cats
by Tara Pirie, Postdoctoral Researcher and Wildlife Research Group,
University of Reading
1 Big cats are among the most widespread top predators on Earth. As with
many large carnivores, big cats are under threat from habitat loss, which
leaves them with less to eat. Their spread-out populations and slow
reproductive rates make them particularly vulnerable. While the habitats in
which big cats live range from boreal forests at high latitudes to tropical
rainforests at the equator, the causes of habitat loss are largely the same:
logging for wood and fuel, plantations, farming and urbanisation. Forest
loss also contributes to climate change. 23 that hydroelectricity, which
is being developed worldwide as an alternative energy source to fossil
fuels, is a big cause of deforestation.
2 Building hydroelectric dams has
caused extinctions and spread
diseases in rivers globally, but the
threat to ecosystems on land has
largely been overlooked. In a recent
study, researchers from China and
Portugal investigated how existing and
planned hydroelectric dams might
affect two carnivores: the near-
threatened jaguar (with an estimated
global population of 173,000) and the endangered tiger (thought to
number between 3,200 and 3,500 worldwide). The distribution of jaguars
and tigers has shrunk 50% and 93% respectively, but the researchers
found that hydroelectric plants pose a substantial risk of further declines.
They found 164 dams that already intersect the jaguar range and
421dams that do the same for tigers. 28-1
3 Large expanses of land are flooded to create reservoirs when building
hydroelectric plants in low-lying, relatively flat areas. Although tigers and
jaguars can and do swim, they mainly hunt species such as deer that live
on land. Sites chosen for dams typically incorporate floodplains and areas
along rivers that are important for both species, since they tend to contain
lots of prey. The flooded area will force both predators and prey into
surrounding areas. 28-2 But if it cannot, the predators may be forced
further afield in search of food, potentially drawing them into conflict with
people who may kill them.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 12 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p13 ===
4 26 , additional hydroelectric dams can increase the presence of people
in remote areas. Roads built to access new dam sites consequently open
up areas that were previously impenetrable. Roads can be a barrier to
some species and kill those that try to cross. Roads can also encourage
new towns and villages, which divide the territory even further. So any
new dams, especially in conservation areas or areas where top predators
prowl, should be avoided. Sadly, most of the dams planned in Asia
overlap with significant portions of the tiger’s range.
5 One way to mitigate the damage from building new hydroelectric plants
may be to do it on slopes outside of areas that are crucial for conserving
tigers and jaguars. The amount of flooded area needed to produce
electricity from these plants when they’re on a slope is smaller compared
to those built on lower ground, reducing the overall damage to the
surrounding habitat. 28-3 Alternative sources of energy are important
for a sustainable future, but their benefits should not come at a substantial
cost to species already under threat.
theconversation.com, 2021
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 13 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p14 ===
Tekst 8
Therapist to the super-rich
adapted from an article by Clay Cockrell
1 If I had a dollar for every time I’ve heard the term “first world problems”,
my bank account would look similar to those of my clients. I work as a
psychotherapist and my specialism is ultra-high net worth individuals.
Over the years, I have developed a great deal of empathy for those who
have far too much. The television programme Succession1) does such a
good job of exploring the kinds of toxic excess my clients struggle with
that when my wife is watching it, I have to leave the room; it just feels like
work.
2 What could possibly be challenging about being a billionaire, you might
ask. Well, what would it be like if you couldn’t trust those close to you? Or
if you looked at any new person in your life with deep suspicion? I hear
this from my clients all the time: “What do they want from me?”; or “How
are they going to manipulate me?”; or “They are probably only friends with
me because of my money.”
3 Then there are the struggles with purpose – the depression that sets in
when you feel like you have no reason to get out of bed. Why bother
going to work when the business you have built or inherited runs itself
without you now? If all your necessities and much more were covered for
the rest of your life – you might struggle with a lack of meaning and
ambition too. My clients are often bored with life and too many times this
leads to them chasing the next high – chemically or otherwise – to fill that
void.
4 Most of the people I see are much more willing to talk about their sex lives
or substance-misuse problems than their bank accounts. Money is seen
as dirty and secret. Money is awkward to talk about. Money is wrapped up
in guilt, shame, and fear. There is a perception that money can immunise
you against mental-health problems when actually, I believe that wealth
can make you – and the people closest to you – much more susceptible to
them.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 14 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p15 ===
5 I see family situations like those in Succession all the time. People like the
series’ lead character, Logan Roy, who came from humble beginnings to
create an incredibly successful media empire. However, it is evident that
he has failed miserably at raising fully functioning children. Too many of
my clients want to indulge their children so “they never have to suffer what
I had to suffer” while growing up. But the result is that they prevent their
children from experiencing the very things that made them successful:
sacrifice, hard work, overcoming failure and developing resilience.
6 Succession is built on the idea of a group of wealthy children vying for
who will take the mantle from their father – none of them are able to
convince him that they can do it. And that is because they have reached
adulthood completely unprepared to take on any responsibility. The
wealthy parents I see, often because of their own guilt and shame, are not
preparing their children for the challenges of managing their wealth. On
numerous occasions the child of a wealthy family has said to me: “We
never talked about money. I don’t know how much there is or what I’m
supposed to do with it. I don’t know how to take care of it. It’s all so secret
and dirty.”
7 I was raised in a small town in rural Kentucky, solidly in the middle class.
And it can be very difficult to watch these individuals struggle with the
toxicity of excess, isolation and deep mistrust. Succession is a dramatised
version of the world they operate in – it is made for television and part of
its purpose is to give audiences the pleasure of watching the wealthy
struggle. 33
theguardian.com, 2021
noot 1 Succession = een Amerikaanse dramaserie die draait om de fictieve familie Roy,
eigenaren van een wereldwijd mediabedrijf
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 15 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p16 ===
Tekst 9
Granta scoops Buckingham’s new book
by Heloise Wood
1 Granta Books will publish “a powerful antidote to
our atomised world” from author and academic
Will Buckingham: Hello, Stranger.
2 Anne Meadows, senior commissioning editor at
Granta, acquired world English language rights
from Emma Finn at C&W Agency. Hello, Stranger
is billed as “an exploration of how welcoming
strangers into our homes and our cities might
improve our lives and change the world.”
3 Hello, Stranger explores how different cultures – from governors in
Ancient Rome to festival goers in the outer islands of Indonesia –
welcome strangers as guests, enemies and migrants, the publisher said.
The book explores “how opening our doors could cure the loneliness
epidemic, alleviate the migrant crisis and enrich us all.”
4 Buckingham is the author of several books and has a PhD in philosophy
and an MA in social anthropology, and lectures at The Parami Institute in
Myanmar.
5 “Hello, Stranger not only made me feel wiser, and fascinated me with its
brilliant stories, it made me want to be a better, warmer, kinder, more
welcoming person,” Meadows said. “In this era of walls and borders,
loneliness and isolation, I am so glad we’ll be publishing Will on the
Granta Books list, and so excited to bring his sparkling, heart-warming
book into the world.”
For US rights enquiries email Angela Rose on arose@granta.com, for any
other rights questions, contact emma@cwagency.co.uk.
thebookseller.com, 2019
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 16 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p17 ===
Tekst 10
Rewatching classic films
by Andrew Miller
1 Risky business, re-watching old movies. You may decide that a film you
loved in your youth is dross – and that your youthful self was a dolt.
Worse, it might seem offensive, which all those years ago you failed to
notice.
2 Happily, that wasn ’t my experience with “Raiders of the Lost Ark”. “Indiana
Jones and the Dial of Destiny”, the finale of the franchise, is released this
week, and I tease out the saga ’s hidden meanings in my Back Story
column (concluding that Indy is more like us than he appears). “Raiders”
remains a great, great movie: a stunt and gag a minute, a hero brilliantly
conceived from whip to theme-tune, and a star, Harrison Ford, in his
rugged pomp. The latest adventure has enough creepy-crawlies and
cadavers to satisfy the faithful.
3 Besides regret and affection, reconsidering classics can 37 . The
optimism of the original “Top Gun” contrasts tellingly with the nostalgia of
its sequel. Today the avoidable calamity in “Titanic” feels to me like a
parable of climate change. Dive into early James Bond and you realise
how much he has evolved; radically recasting 007 might only be in
character. Beneath its screwball antics, 38 , “Some Like it Hot”, my
favourite film, now seems way ahead of its time.
The Economist, July 2023
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 17 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p18 ===
Tekst 11
Trick or Eat
adapted from an article by Jamie Ducharme
1 For people who typically hoard Halloween
candy past Thanksgiving, here’s some
surprising advice: some dentists actually
condone eating the candy all at once,
rather than rationing it out over weeks.
2 After you eat sweets, bacteria feed on the
sugars and starches left on your teeth and
form plaque. Eventually, the acid in
plaque begins to wear away at the enamel
coating your teeth, forming tiny holes,
also known as cavities, that grow larger
and larger over time.
3 Anna Berik, a dentist in Newton, Massachusetts, says it doesn’t really
matter, at least from a cavity-forming perspective, how much you eat at a
time. “At some point, there’s a threshold where the bacteria can’t really
work any harder. They can only make the acid so fast,” she says. For that
reason, feasting on sweets, then brushing your teeth right after, is actually
less cavity-causing than spreading that candy out over the next three
months and having sugar in your mouth day after day after day.”
4 Chris Kammer, a dentist in Madison, Wisconsin, also favors the one-and-
done approach, so much so, in fact, that he started a Halloween candy
buyback program, with the goal of preventing kids from dipping into their
trick-or-treating bag over and over again. Kammer encourages kids to
select a few favorite pieces of candy, then bring the rest of their haul to
one of his 2,400 buyback sites around the country, where they can be
traded in for cash before being shipped out to troops overseas.
Time, 2017
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 18 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p19 ===
Ga verder op de volgende pagina.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 19 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p20 ===
Tekst 12
Lees eerst de opgaven voordat je naar de tekst gaat.
Football match? We can predict the outcome!
adapted from an article by Taha Yasseri, Associate Professor, School of
Sociology; University College Dublin
The legendary German goalkeeper Manuel Neuer
once said: “You can plan, but what happens on a
football field cannot be predicted.” This sentiment
goes a long way to explaining why football is the
most popular sport worldwide. Anything can
happen on the field, and the more surprising the
outcome of a match, the more memorable it will be.
But our new study suggests the results of football matches are becoming
more predictable.
Data comparison
We developed a computer model to predict the results of football matches
based on data from almost 88,000 matches played over 26 years (1993-
2019) across 11 major European leagues. Our model tried to predict
whether the home or away team would win by looking at their
performance in a certain number of previous matches. Our model is
simpler than the state-of-the-art predictive models used by betting houses
today. Its simplicity means our model is going to be less accurate than the
more complex predictive models. Even so, our model predicted the results
correctly roughly 75% of the time.
Increasingly correct
We found it has become progressively easier to predict the results of
football matches over the years. For instance, our model could correctly
predict the winner of a Bundesliga (German league) match in 60% of
matches in 1993, whereas its performance was as high as 80% in 2019.
Finding that football results have become more predictable initially
surprised us. We thought more money and higher stakes must have made
the game more competitive over time, and therefore we should expect
more excitement and less predictability in recent years. Examining the
data more closely helps us understand why this isn’t the case.
A widening divide
When we looked at teams in the same league in a given season, we
observed that in more recent years, the points have been distributed
among teams much less evenly: overall the stronger teams have become
more successful, while the weaker teams have become less successful.
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 20 / 21 lees verder ►►►

=== p21 ===
This echoes the notion that “the rich get richer and the poor get poorer”.
This widening gap could be the result of a cycle where stronger teams
end up making more money, which makes them even more powerful in the
players market, which then leads to an even stronger squad.
Home-field advantage
One other trend in our results helped us understand why football matches
could be becoming more predictable. As football fans will know, many of
the most exciting games take place when a strong team plays away in the
field of a weaker team, and the weaker home team, relying on often epic
support from their fans, ends up winning. We observed an initial home-
field advantage of 30% in the early 1990s – which means on average a
team playing at home was 30% more likely to win compared to a team
playing away. The home-field advantage has gradually shrunk to only
15% during the most recent seasons. In other words, it has halved over
the past two-and-a-half decades.
The strong are getting stronger
So there’s less and less chance for the weaker teams to benefit from
playing at home. It seems, in general, that stronger teams will win
anyway, no matter where they play. This could be in part because
transportation and training have significantly improved over the past few
years, minimising the logistical challenges of playing away, and making it
easier for the players to adapt. But more importantly, this seems to be
further evidence of the increasing strength of the stronger teams.
The (future) success of the sport
There are some limitations to our study. We only looked at the 11 largest
European men’s leagues, and our analysis didn’t go further back than
1993. Nevertheless, the results of our work are robust, particularly for
bigger leagues such as the ones in England, Spain and Germany. Our
findings highlight the need for stronger regulations around club incomes,
expenditures and player salaries, including, perhaps, the introduction of
more effective caps. Otherwise, the success of the sport might become
the very reason for its decline. A game that’s easy to predict is not one
that will necessarily keep bringing crowds to the stadiums.
theconversation.com, 2021
HA-1002-a-25-1-b 21 / 21 lees verdeer i►nd►e ► 